# The Relationship Between Ice Cream Prices and Coupons

The purpose of this report is to gain insights about the ice cream market in an effort to maximize revenue from ice cream sales in grocery markets. After gaining information about current pricing and marketing strategies for ice cream companies and grocery store chains, the key focus of this analysis was narrowed to developing a model to predict the unit price of ice cream sold based upon coupons for ice cream units. For this report, unit price is defined as the price per any single packaged ice cream product (e.g., 16-ounce pint, 32-ounce quart, etc.). Additional variables are included in the central, generalized linear regression model in order to capture as many influencing factors as possible given the available data. Through this model, the amount of money saved per unit as a result of a coupon being used also is shown to have a positive relationship with the unit price. While saving money on products resulting in a higher-paid price sounds counter-intuitive, based on a study done by a Professor of Marketing at Rice University, Dr. Utpal Dholakia, this positive relationship is associated with many psychological decision factors that consumers are presented with when a premium brand is offered at a discount rate. A difference-in-difference experiment is recommended to gain additional insights regarding the causal relationship between unit price and coupons.
Based on this analysis it is recommended that the marketing department of grocery stores experiment with providing shoppers that typically purchase non-premium ice cream brands coupons for premium brands in an effort to increase revenue per unit of ice cream. Building on this recommendation, a diff-in-diff experiment can be conducted to further understand the potential causal relationship between coupons and unit price. Lastly, additional regression analysis is recommended based on the findings of this analysis.

# Model Development
Not all flavor choices have a significant impact on the unit price paid by the customer, but some do. This can be understood as some flavors have a positive or negative effect on unit price compared to vanilla ice cream which is used as the base case.
This model also takes into account household demographics of the purchaser. The model uses the East Coast region, and the race “white” as base cases with all other respective category options as factors. The model also uses a binary option of married or not, whether or not one resides in a house, and North or South geographic location. This model includes binary variables that identify certain household amenities present in the customer’s home (e.g., internet, cable, microwave, etc.). One of the potential reasons for doing so is to measure the household’s income investment in their home. A potential theory motivating this inclusion is that if a household is of higher income, it is more likely to pay more per unit of ice cream than a lower-income family.
Additionally, the model includes whether consumers use a coupon for the purchase and if so, how much that coupon saves per unit. The model predicts a negative correlation between coupon usage and a positive correlation for amount saved per unit. In context, this means that some individuals that have a coupon are motivated to purchase ice cream that is costlier, simply because the coupon makes them feel like they are getting a better deal while others that were already purchasing premium brands simply pay less which is lost potential revenue.
A diff-in diff experiment can be used to determine if the presence of a coupon affects a customer’s purchasing habits in a causal relationship. Using a coupon as the treatment, data can be collected from regular shopping purchases before and after a coupon for premium ice cream is available. Based on the regression output, coupons for premium ice cream should be given to generic brand purchasers to incentivize them to switch, and not given to households that already purchase premium ice cream. This experiment allows a more causal relationship to be established between the coupon and the unit price purchases, holding constant other factors.

# Analysis
Analysis
By setting the expected False Discovery Rate (FDR) at 5%, the true p-value cutoff becomes 0.02041. Therefore, the new rejection region suggests a total of 46 significant independent variables to explain the ice cream unit price. We expect to have 43 true discoveries by the model.
The 46 FDR-filtered variables establish both intuitive and surprising associations. Using coupons, which reduces the unit price of ice cream, agrees with common sense where people often pay less with coupons. The larger the household size leading to less price per quantity is also reasonable as such families tend to buy in bulk. Regarding household income, the p-value suggests a significant positive relationship to the unit price. This can be explained as the more disposable income a household has, the more premium they are willing to pay, resulting in a greater unit price. By contrast, there are associations with surprises. For example, the model suggests that households with microwaves tend to have a lower unit price spent on ice cream. Seeing ice cream flavors (of same size) have an impact on the unit price is also counter-intuitive.
When regressing over too many variables, it becomes challenging as the number of variables increases, leading to an increased chance of including false positives -- falsely significant variables. Controlling FDR can help by filtering out some false discoveries with adjustment to the true rejection region using the expected percentage of false results, thereby promoting the model’s validity. However, FDR is ultimately a statistical tool that helps people to have some control over false positives. The approach risks to filter out theoretically correct variables, or ends up with keeping the wrong variables with significant p-values. This may lead to the problem of wrong functional form in building the regression model. For example, in our case, microwave with a significant p-value is counter-intuitive. As a result of the theoretical issues underlying this model, reliable recommendations should not be pulled from it.

# References
Dholakia, Utpal. “Why Using Coupons Is Bad For Your Wallet.” Psychology Today. Sussex Publishers. Accessed January 10, 2020. https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-science-behind-behavior/201508/why-using-coupo ns-is-bad-your-wallet.
Gartenstein, Devra. “Ice Cream Pricing Strategy.” Small Business - Chron.com. Chron.com, November 21, 2017. https://smallbusiness.chron.com/ice-cream-pricing-strategy-10975.html.
Pearson, Bryan. “How Retailers Can Maximize The Power of Coupons.” Forbes. Forbes Magazine, March 15, 2017. https://www.forbes.com/sites/bryanpearson/2017/03/15/research-reveals-how-retailers-can-maximiz e-the-power-of-coupons/#2d7e16092f01.
